# Facts and Classification

## Summary

Facts provide information that can be used in the PE console to allocate a node
to a Node Group within the Node Classifier. Facts are generated on the node and
therefore can be manipulated.

Trusted facts which are embedded into the certificate and cannot be manipulated
without creating a new certificate are the preferred information variables for
classification rules. This provides a higher level of security to
classification.

## Expectations

This standard applies to any user that uses rules within Node Groups of the
Node Classifier.

## Best Practice Details

### Preferred Option

All Puppet users using the Node Classifier and using rules should use variables
from the trusted facts array (`$trusted`). These facts are included in the
node's certificate or generated on the Puppet Server and, as such, cannot be changed on
the node.

Inserting information into the node's certificate is done at agent installation
time as X.509v3 Certificate Extensions, which are part of the PKI Certificate
standard (X.509) and are well understood. Puppet has a range of extensions
allocated, with names, that can be easily used by users, such as `pp_role`,
`pp_region`, `pp_datacenter`, and `pp_apptier`. Further information on
certificate extensions can be found at
https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/ssl_attributes_extensions.html

### Discouraged Options

Using facts from the standard facts array ($facts) is discouraged as these
variables are generated on the node and therefore can be changed leading to a
possible change in classification. From a security and operational perspective
this is not desirable as it could be used to get configuration the node should
not have, potentially including sensitive data(passwords, etc).

## Feedback / Ideas for Improvement

* Loosely following RFC2119 for wording of things like 'MUST', 'SHALL', and the
  like: https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt
* Feedback can be provided as an issue on this [Git
  repository](https://github.com/puppetlabs/best-practices/issues).

## Other Information

* https://puppet.com/docs/puppet/latest/ssl_attributes_extensions.html
* https://puppet.com/docs/pe/latest/managing_nodes/grouping_and_classifying_nodes.html#writing-node-group-rules
